Bill Tift at the University of California,
University of Arizona. Well, he's from the
University of Arizona, but we're currently at the
Student Union of the University of California.
Okay, so let's get started at the beginning, and
Bill, for the record, give your full name. William
Grant Tift. And where and when were you born? April
5th, 1932 in Derby, Connecticut. How did you first
get interested in astronomy? This has to do with
the history of planetary astronomy. I never
wanted to be anything else. I became interested in
science or knew I was going to be a scientist about
fourth grade in school in astronomy by the time I
was in eighth grade. And through a local amateur
astronomer, elderly lady in my hometown, I met
Dirk Brouwer at Yale.
for the next major step, well, in various amateur
activities, AAVSO, things like that,
Westinghouse Science Talent Search. I was one of
the trip winners in 1950 to Washington and got to
know Harlow Shapley. Harvard was the obvious
place to go to get undergraduate training, and so I
went to Harvard as an undergraduate. And you were
an astronomy major. I was an astronomy major.
Which is kind of rare. Well, there were a number of
us. Several other names that are Well, one in
planetary astronomy is one of my roommates was
Fred Franklin at CFA. He's, I believe, in
planetary astronomy. Yes, and I interviewed him
in England. We were roommates at Harvard. And Dick
Sears, who's known in astronomy, was one of the...
So we had astronomy majors in those days. When did
you get your bachelor's degree? 1954. Okay, and
then where'd you go to grad school? Caltech. Why
did you pick Caltech? Because astronomy was
disintegrating at Harvard. That was when Bach
left Harvard and it switched from an
observational institution in the Shapley
Revolution. When Shapley resigned and the
Southern Hemisphere Observatory was
potentially being closed and things like that, it
was not a time to go on in observational astronomy
and Caltech was the obvious place where
first-rate observational astronomy was being
done. So I went to Caltech. And
what was your thesis and who was your thesis
advisor for your PhD? OK. My thesis was on the
photometry of the nuclei, nuclear regions of
galaxies, well, photometry of galaxies on an
eight-color system. My advisor was Art Code. But
he was at Wisconsin, wasn't he? He was at Caltech at
that time, and then
later left Caltech. I guess he went back to
Wisconsin as director at that time. Bill Baum was
my other sort of advisor. I say sort of advisor
because I actually saw art code only twice during
my thesis, the beginning and at one intermediate
point. I had one discussion with Bill Baum.
Otherwise, I pretty much did it myself. When did
you get your PhD? 1958. Okay, and what did you do
then? I went as a postdoc to Australia to work on
Magellanic Cloud problems. With Bach? Well, Bach
was director then, and it was through Bach that I
made the arrangements. But again, it was a program
I designed myself. I wasn't working specifically
with anyone. Okay, now, so when did you leave
Australia? Okay, Australia, I was a two-year
National Science Foundation postdoc. I left
there in 1959
and finished the last few months of the postdoc
at... Caltech, and then I had arranged a job in
Nashville with Carl Seifert at the University of,
well, at Vanderbilt University, Dyer
Observatory. Unfortunately, Carl Seifert had
been killed in an automobile accident. As a matter
of fact, it was It happened an hour before I arrived
in Nashville for my first visit. I was met by a
graduate student, in fact, Charles Tolbert,
well-known in astronomy, who told me that Carol
had just been killed in an automobile accident. I
went to Seaford's funeral.
But that changed what was to be a three-year
appointment working in high-latitude blue stars
to a one-year appointment immediately looking
for a job, which is when, well, I had previously met
John Hall and was interested in possibilities at
Lowell. And so I immediately picked up that
thread. And since Harold Johnson had just left
Lowell and they had just acquired the Ohio State
69-inch telescope, And I had the kind of
credentials both in photometry and experience
with large telescopes. So basically I was offered
Errol Johnson's job at Lowell. So I was actually at
Vanderbilt then only for one year. Okay, when you
got to Lowell, what was the place like?
Well, it's a beautiful place to live and a
beautiful place to enjoy yourself in perhaps one
of the most wonderful settings and pleasant
places to live. But I think the one thing which is
most obvious about Lowell was obvious then was the
extremely tight budget under which they
operated. The question of the controls of the
lowell estate and a fairly small section portion
of which was devoted to maintaining the
observatory and although i don't know many of the
details i know there was a lot of concern about
whether the any of the additional estate money
would would become available to astronomy the
uh I never really went into any discussions on
this, but there was a lot of concern as to how
you could operate an effective modern
observatory on the extremely small amounts of
money which were available. You mentioned
yesterday that early on in the space program, it
was about time, you were getting old. the powers
that be or whoever decided that they really didn't
want to get involved with the space program
because it didn't have the base on which to do it,
which is kind of surprising in that later that they
did get the Planetary Data Center and everything.
Could you say that for the record? Right, that's
correct. Well, for various reasons, part of them
personal in my own life, I was going through
approaching divorce and so on, there was a certain
feeling on my part that I needed some change. The
space program was developing. And I wrote a letter
at one point to the Institute of Astrophysics or
whatever it is, the NASA Institute in New York
City, I believe, and expressing interest in space
astronomy and was referred to Jocelyn Gill and I
forget his first name, Foster's division in NASA
on manned space astronomy. And They invited me
back to Washington for a while. I went back as a
consultant for a couple of months. What year was
this, roughly? It would have been around 19...
Well, I went to Lowell in 61. Probably the original
correspondence here was in 62, possibly as late as
63. When I came back from Washington, I was quite
interested in the space program and potentially
interested in applying to the astronaut program.
In fact, I did apply later in 1965. But I remember
having discussions with John Hall and expressing
my interest in the space program and getting this
feedback or concern that, well, this really was
not the kind of direction that they felt that they
could support the program. But if I was interested
in going into this, that perhaps this wasn't the
proper base to operate from. And, of course, they
had hired me in a completely different context,
basically, to use, I mean, to do photometry with
some of the large, their newer large telescope,
well, the 6090s. Not that it was that great a
telescope, because it wasn't at that time until
they redid it a few years later. and made it into a
72-inch with a quality mirror. I spent a lot of
time... Well, there were two problems. One, the
69-inch was not a high-quality telescope. You
couldn't do imagery with it. The images tended to
distort rapidly as a function of temperature
changes. I remember doing a lot of installation
work on the telescope, trying to control the
figure on the mirror. And also, because of the very
low budgets at Lowell, they had very little
instrumentation. There was no equipment,
really, to go with it. One reason they had hired me
was I did have my own part of my own photometer.
Harold Johnson had taken all the equipment with
him when he left. And there really was no working
equipment. I got a small ONR grant with which I
built up a working photometer and did use the
69-inch to extend the work that I had done as my
dissertation. That was my main new scientific
research that I did at Lowell. But in parallel, I
was developing this interest in the space
program. And it was that aspect that,
well, John Wall specifically was a little
apprehensive about whether this was an
appropriate type of development that Lowell
wanted to support. Let me just get something in for
the record. When did you leave Lowell? 1964,
essentially. Initially, it was half time, I
think, from July to October of 64. I was half time at
Lowell and half time at Arizona. And then in
October of 64, I was full-time at Arizona. Where
you have been since then. Where I've been there
since then, that's correct. I went there as
associate professor and was promoted to full
professor in 1973. When you were at Lowell,
Lowell is, of course, famous to the public for its
planetary and particularly Mars studies. But, of
course, they always did, right from the very
beginning, a lot of stellar and galactic work. for
which, of course, they didn't get the credit that
they deserved. But when you were there, what was
the attitude towards planetary versus stellar
and galactic and extragalactic work? I mean, you
were there for this life. Well, there was a strong
support, I think, or a feeling that the work that
Harold had done and the study of star clusters,
There wasn't much experience there in galaxies,
although I remember having discussions with some
of the U.S. Naval Observatory people. There had
been some interesting work that had been done by,
what was his name, some multicolor photography or
multicolor imagery that had been done on galaxies
at Naval Observatory. I think they were quite
enthusiastic, actually, about the work that I was
doing on galaxy photometry. It fit rather nicely
into the kind of things that Harold had been
initially exploring. I'd also done work in star
clusters and things, so I had a lot in common in
principle with the kinds of things that Harold
Johnson had been doing, and I think they were very
enthusiastic about that kind of work. I was
never... I encountered very little feeling that
Lowell had a planetary orientation or there
certainly was no pressure in any sense to be doing
anything that was connected with planetary work.
I think they considered their work potentially
quite broad-based.
One of the very visible programs there was Henry
Giklis' work on proper motions of red faint stars,
and I actually was considering some observations
of some of the proper motion stars. I'd say it was a
fairly broad-based program, stellar,
extra-galactic, Obviously planetary, but that
wasn't an aspect that I had much connection to. Did
you ever feel that you were considered by real
astronomers to be second rate because you were at
Lowell instead of, say, Mount Wilson? No, I didn't
have that feeling at all. I thought Lowell was a
highly respected observatory. It was recognized
that they had budgetary or monetary problems.
But, for example, my request for an ONR grant was
very well received. And Lowell, I think, was a very
respected observatory. And the people that were
there, not that there weren't very many of us, but
Bill Sinton was well known. And of course, Harold
Johnson had been extremely well known. It was a
small group, but I think my general impression was
highly regarded. You overlapped with some of the
real old timers there. And that's what I want to hit
you for. OK.
I saw,
well, of the Slipher brothers, I knew EC
moderately. That is, I met him a couple of times,
had a few discussions with him. Vesto, I saw a few
times. He was not around the observatory very
much. And that was really before I got into my
modern work in galaxies. In a way, I wish I'd had a
chance to have actually talked to some of them
about some of the early redshift work that they
did. I never actually had any direct contact with
them on that. For the record, of the two brothers,
EC was the one who did what? The two Slipher
brothers. Bestow, Melman, and EC. Yeah, you
probably know. I mean, I don't know the history
quite as well. Which one was the Mars guy? Well, I
assume EC was more of the planetary oriented, and
Vesto a little more. Well, I know Vesto, I believe,
was the one who did the actual
rich of observations. interesting in that if you
go back into elementary textbooks of 10 or 20 years
ago, it's always Hubble, Hubble, Hubble, and now
people have been getting their act together, and
they note that it was really Slipher that did it.
Slipher did the actual first observations.
That's correct. Slipher was the one who made the
observations, though I believe it's fair to say it
was Hubble that recognized the significance, and
I don't really know what the communication chains
were. I mean, they obviously knew each other,
and... I think any material or information that
was collected by Slipher became known and was
used, at least as a starting point, for Hubble.
What exactly how it influenced Hubble's
beginning, I have really no idea. But it puzzles me
in a way, and that's why I wish I had known at the time
what I was going to be doing later, because it would
have been very interesting to talk to the Slipher
brothers about What were their original
motivations for doing this? And what were their
impressions? Unfortunately, I have no idea. They
obviously didn't pursue it or follow it up the way
Hubble did. So whether they considered it just a
curiosity or whether they really thought deeply
about what this might mean, I don't know. But they
preceded the knowledge of what they were looking
at. And I believe part of the original motivation
for their observations were undoubtedly the idea
that perhaps galaxies were... I mean, we've seen
this in the literature, but again, I don't have it
as a direct statement for mislifers that galaxies
were considered as possible solar systems in
formation. That was one of the old concepts. Did
you ever meet Lamplin? No. No. Because there was a
lot of... radiometry that went on in the 20s and 30s
I knew Edison Pettit but that was back through in
fact Edison Pettit was the man who built the
photometer that I took to Australia or built the
Kolbach to my specifications but he was the only
really old uh uh I guess he was retired from Mount
Wilson, but he was still running his machine shop
in Pasadena, and I was referred to him and made
arrangements for him to build my photometer. But
again, I never had any in-depth conversations
with these people. I've heard various stories
about how the old work was done, but... Well, let's
hear an old story. Well, like the first
observations of photometry on the 100-inch
telescope when... They used a ballistic
galvanometer operating
across the 10-foot width of the Newtonian
platform on the 100-inch telescope to get the
first photometric deflections that were used in
some of the early galaxy photometry that people
like Pettit and Stevens and Whitford and so on were
doing. At Lowell, when you were there, what did the
people on the staff think of Percival Lowell?
Well, I had the impression that he was a very highly
respected founder of the observatory. I never
heard anything negative. And the old library
there, the tours that they held, his founding of
the observatory, his original connection with
Mars and so on was always very highly regarded, as
far as I could tell. I was never directly, I say,
involved in any of this. I never remember any
conversations relating to Lowell. I had a number
of conversations with the
man who administered the estate. executor, not
executor, but sole trustee or something, wasn't
it? Sole trustee, yes. Was his nephew or something
like that? Yes, his nephew, Roger Lowell Putnam
was the trustee, and I remember going for a hike up
Mount Humphreys. We didn't get to the top, but I
remember I went on a hike with him. I said, Again,
the main theme that came through was lack of money.
I never detected anything but enthusiasm for
doing the best astronomy we can at this
institution, but we don't have much money. How did
the townsfolk treat the observatory and the
astronomers there? My impression, again, was
that this was a highly respected institution.
Again, I never detected any animosity or any
feeling that this
was anything but a real nice thing to have in town.
And it was a standard viewing place. People would
drive up the drive, and it was always considered
one of the best places to look over the surrounding
area. I just flew over it Saturday, and there was a
hole in the clouds. The only one between... I think
San Antonio and San Francisco, and there was
Flagstaff, and there was Mars Hill with the little
white domes on top. Of course, Anderson Mesa
development had just started, and there were a
couple of, well, there was, I guess, there was a
telescope down there, and I can't remember the
exact sequence in which these were moved or built,
which was the one connected with the lunar mapping
program. which was going on there. And that was
being done by, what, the Air Force or NASA? That was
the Air Force. It was an Air Force program, and it
was specifically oriented towards
preparing best maps of the moon for the moon
landings, future moon landings. The USGS, I guess
it was, and Gene Shoemaker's program, They were in
Flagstaff around that time. They were located on
the north side of town, a different location.
Yeah, I knew Gene Shoemaker, or got to know him
later, because we were both astronaut candidates
in 1965. But again, I had no direct connection,
just these were interesting programs which were
going on in the area. There was interest in
specifically the preparation for the moon
landing. I didn't associate... Any of this work
with any of the other aspects or any other parts of
the solar system was all very much moon-oriented.
Now, I want to take you to Arizona and then your
involvement with NASA because the title of this
book, God Willing the Creek Don't Rise, it gets
printed, is Phoenix, NASA and the Rebirth of
Planetary Astronomy. And you did have a strong
connection with NASA, which is how I first got to
meet you. When did this start? Well, I'd say it
started with this letter to NASA Space Science
Institute in New York City and then was referred to
Jocelyn Gill, OSS, that branch of OSSA,
Because I was interested in the space program, and
I wanted to find out, well, was there any way of
getting more closely involved in it? That's why
Jocelyn Gill then invited me to come to
Washington, be a consultant in her office,
specifically preparing some training manuals or
answering questions for the astronauts. I
remember writing a little paper for Jocelyn on...
meteors as a little information paper to go to the
then Mercury and I guess by then Gemini
astronauts.
Out of this meeting with our original contacts
with Jocelyn, and I don't remember the details,
and I'd always kind of expressed interest in the
lunar program, I was referred to a
conference that was being held in Chicago. At
O'Hare Airport. At O'Hare Airport. And I was the
guy that arranged it and chaired it. Right. It was
on the military orbiting laboratory. And at this
time, there were discussions about merging the
Air Force orbiting laboratory program and NASA's
plans for orbiting laboratories. And this was
called the MOL Conference or something. And I
don't remember exactly how I got invited to it, but
I'm sure it was in one way connected with out of
Jocelyn Gill's office. That's where the size of
the original space telescope, which is now called
Light Space Telescope, got to be 120 inches
because Aidan Meinel was there. And I asked him,
what's the biggest diffraction thing we could
have in 10 years? And he said 120 inches. It was at
that meeting that I came in knowing very little
about what was going on. I, of course, had heard of
the Air Force program and I knew there were general
long-range plans on the part of NASA, and it
was at that meeting that basically I met Aiden
Meinel, who recognized my interest, and it was
then, and I believe, was Harlan Smith at that
meeting? Yes. Both Harlan Smith and Aiden Meinel
were at that meeting, recognized this as a
potential field of development, apparently
recognized me as somebody who was interested in
working in it. And I got job offers very shortly
from both Aden to come to Arizona and from Harlan to
come to Texas. And
went to basically begin developing manned space
science programs to help them in developing that
kind of program. And I like the atmosphere at
Arizona, particularly when I visited one right
after the other and accepted Aidan's offer to,
again, I hated to leave Lowell. It was a beautiful
place, and I was doing good work in galaxy
photometry, but I say I needed a change for several
reasons. One was personal with my I was coming
divorced, I was divorced in 1964, with custody of
two children, and then aged two and a half and three
and a half. I needed a change, and I was very
interested in the space program, and I said, well,
this is a good time to go do something else. Hayden
offered an atmosphere, and he's a remarkable
person. Well, so, of course, was Harlan. I learned
photometry from Harlan at Harvard, which was
where I learned how to do photoelectric
photometry. But Arizona offered the
opportunity. The new space sciences building had
just been completed. The section was dedicated to
space astronomy that I helped to lay out and built
up. Well, we obtained a NASA grant, initial grant,
I guess, I'm not sure whether I'd have to go back and
look at the papers, exactly how my name and Aiden
Meinl's name were combined. His philosophy was he
would run the classified military side of things,
and I would handle the NASA civilian side. What was
NASA giving you the money to do? Initially, it was
experiment or possible design. I think our
original proposal was a telescope that would
float beside Gemini or be carried on Gemini
spacecraft and be operated possibly remotely,
maybe connected to it. We wanted to investigate
the possibility of carrying a small telescope
attached or slightly detached from Gemini and
operated in real time. This then later led to the
development of, well, I had two fundamental
programs that I worked on. three, actually, that
were funded, some out of NASA headquarters and
some later out of Marshall Space Flight Center.
One was to develop a ultraviolet camera that would
operate on a stable platform, stabilized
platform, for ultraviolet photography with film
recovery. The idea was to bring back a as complete a
survey of the sky in the UV as possible. We were
developing reflecting filter, interference
filter type coatings and design of a very compact
aspheric system for wide field imaging. And the
idea was to do a sky survey, photographic and bring
back the film. That was one of our key programs.
Here's one thing I've got written down, and I want
to ask you before I forget it. In your opinion,
what's NASA like today compared to what it was in
the early 60s? Well, if it was like it was in the
early 60s, I would probably still be in it. What's
changed?
Well, as our programs developed, as we got further
into experiment development and possibilities,
It became clear that there was, and you'll find
this in my discussion with Joe Terowitz, that
there was an intense conflict between the manned
and the unmanned side of NASA. And I was interested
in the manned side. I felt that man had a role in
space. I was also strongly oriented toward the
lunar program. and felt that we should get a base on
the moon as soon as possible and begin to develop
some self-sufficient. I thought the long range in
astronomy really should be founded on the moon.
But
what I saw progressively happening was a lot of,
well, I was being lost in this battle between
manned and unmanned astronomy.
Ultimately, when the things like the Vietnam War
developed and so on, everything seemed to be
turning downhill. I didn't see... We didn't get
our mission, for example. We would have flown on
Skylab 2. There had been a Skylab 2, but it was cut
off. We saw the follow-on OIO programs being cut
back. And it looked like, well, yes, one could hang
on in the field, but The future really didn't look
very bright, and especially didn't look very
bright for manned astronomy. So I basically,
after spending quite a bit of NASA money, simply
decided that wasn't a profitable field to work in.
I was on the original planning group for the Large
Space Telescope. I was a member of the Woods Hole
study group that led to the
planning for HST, but it was a long way downstream.
And I didn't see much opportunity in the interim
period. When you were getting NASA money, how did
headquarters handle you? Did they micromanage?
Do you think they knew what you were doing? Well,
they knew what I was doing, but I was supported for
funny reasons. I was in the manned space program,
and I had very strong connections with
particularly people at Marshall Space Flight
Center. They were interested in developing
basically packages for some of their large
rockets. They were interested in basically the
origin of the Skylab program, and they wanted
packages to put on them. They weren't getting
cooperation from NASA headquarters.
But I was well enough supported that there was a
feeling at headquarters that, They had better
support me, better fund me, so that they would have
some control over what was going on. I received
money from Nancy Roman's office, not because my
programs were especially favored by them, but so
that they could retain some control of what I was
doing. And instead of being funded entirely out of
Marshall Space Flight Center, which is where
about half of my money came from, there was a lot
of... That's what I mean by this conflict
between... the headquarters and the stations,
this was very apparent in the work that I was doing.
It did play a role in the way I was funded.
Do you think that astronomers in general do a good
job of selling themselves to the public?
And this includes planetary astronomy, because I
assume that that's part of astronomy. Well, I
think people have become much more aware of this
now than they were in the past. I think in the past,
astronomy has really been pretty naive in
assuming that just the fact that it's good
academic science should be sufficient. So
basically, I know. I don't think astronomers have
done a very good job of selling themselves to the
public. And it takes a lot of time to do it. And the
problem is, we'll say, the kind of work that I do.
When you work as an individual scientist, you
don't have a lot of support, particularly if you do
controversial science like I do with no support,
or practically no support. You don't have time. to
spend a lot of time doing the popularizing. What
you need is a large enough base and the kind of
support that you can have a public relations
person.
You need the kind of people around you who can
provide the interface. And that's an area we have
not seen, I don't think, well enough supported.
Scientists have got to be given enough support
that they can have some PR people who know how to
construct this interface. Because most of us
don't have the time to do it ourselves, nor the
knowledge to do it ourselves, to do the proper kind
of interface. And so I think there's been a lot of
very naive scientists who think that all they've
got to say is, well, I mean, everybody knows good
science should be done. That should be
sufficient. It isn't sufficient. You've got to
popularize it. You've got to present it in a way
that you'll be... the public would be more
enthusiastic about. Very few scientists know how
to do that. Of course, if you go way back, you know,
to the turn of the century, there were some really
great promoters around in astronomy, George
Orwell. Now, that all seemed to die, and what I
always call the Mount Wilson, the public be damned
attitude took over. Yes, I would agree very much
with that. And we have seen the basic, well, it's
often called the Mount Wilson or Caltech,
Princeton Access
developed. And one had a feeling that, well, if
they thought something should be done, that
supposedly was all that was necessary. And there
were plenty of us out there who didn't agree with
that philosophy. I mean, Aidan Meinl and I were a
good example of who felt that we could have done a
lot more science in the man space program. than, in
fact, we ever got a chance to do because
the decisions had been made that it was to be done
one particular way. And the man space program,
well, give us your money. We don't really care
about this program. Just give us the money and
we'll go ahead and do the astronomy. Do you think
that attitude is changing now?
Not entirely. I mean, we still see the same...
fundamental disagreement that astronomy
divides into, or science divides into, those who
are willing to work with the manned program and
those who just want unmanned spacecraft. And
there's a role for both. I've always felt, and I
think that the public, in many respects, is more
enthusiastic, or there's a lot of enthusiasm
still for manned space-type activity. and I don't
think that resource was ever properly supported
by science, that approach. I can't interview any
of the participants in this, so I'm asking
everybody that might have an opinion. What do you
think killed planetary astronomy in the early
part of this century?
Killed it? I don't think it was ever killed. Sure,
there was some stuff being done in the 20s and 30s,
but But planetary astronomy was a big part of
astronomy at the turn of the century. And then by
the time you get to 1920s, it's not. Oh. Well, OK. I
mean, there was a big shift in interest because the
capabilities came along and the knowledge came
along to explore stellar astronomy and then extra
galactic astronomy. I mean, there's always a
tendency to move, certainly, or I feel, to move
where the frontier is. And the frontier is usually
near the limits of detection. And when the planets
are bright and easy to look at. And I think a lot of
the reason that people turned back to planetary
astronomy, though, was when the close planetary
flybys started coming along and people suddenly
realized how much more detail and interest or
interesting subjects there were that that It is
the space program itself that swung the interest
back in the direction of planetary astronomy,
because it became clear that so much more could in
fact be done. And then we had the new generations of
detectors. And it's kind of interesting. I think
you see these new techniques being focused on very
nearby things, like the solar system, and very
distant things. And there's a gap now. The gap is
now in between, where For example, we're looking
at very distant galaxies and ignoring the nearby
ones, except for distance scale calibration and
so on. We're making the assumption, again, that we
understand the nearby thing. And I disagree very
strongly on that. The nearby galaxies, I think,
harbor some very interesting,
well, my own work on the question, of course, is
directly relevant there. you see this
leapfrogging technique. Z equals zero to Z equals
five. We focus your attention on the nearby
things. I think the space program did that. The
primitive early investigations, beginning as
early as, say, the Ranger spacecraft, which
focused attention again on the detailed surface
of the moon or the properties of the surface of the
moon. You see that once a spacecraft had studied
the Jupiter system and Now a lot of interest in
ground-based observations of the satellites, of
the studies of EO and so on was refocused by the
space program. I don't think the astronomers
themselves would have ever, by themselves, would
have ever gotten as enthusiastic about the solar
system if it hadn't been for the space program.
Recently, so you think that NASA money, really,
for probes and supporting ground-based
astronomy really brought back monetary
strongman? Yes, I think I feel that very strongly.
I don't think it was the astronomers themselves,
even given the detectors. Well, some, I'm sure,
would have looked at the planets, but it was the
excitement generated by the space program that
brought, well, probably a lot of people had been
trained or Their job opportunities were
conditional upon the availability of space
money. The number of astronomers trained was
increased considerably because of the space
program. Recently, a lot of people have been
getting a lot of publicity and evidently money.
By working on topics such as search for
extraterrestrial intelligence, search for
other solar systems, the ozone hole in the Earth's
atmosphere, and killer comets and asteroids, you
think they're overdoing it? Well, I think these
are all valid fields of investigation. The reason
why some of these are emphasized or why the focus is
there is because they are programs which you can
popularize. Now, I don't think that should be the
judge of how you support science. And in a sense,
yeah, I think I would agree with you. I think some of
these are overemphasized in the sense of, well,
the public will support this, or we can put it in
such a way that the public will recognize its,
quote, importance. So OK, that's a good way to go. I
think part of this work is motivated by we need
money, and this is a way to get money. And not
necessarily because it's necessarily the best
science. I'm sure that if you ask a general
cross-section of scientists what are the best
problems to concentrate on, that these would be
mentioned, but they certainly wouldn't be the
unique ones. And I think things like the SETI
program,
there's a lot of interest in this, and it is
scientifically important.
On the other hand, it's a little bit like the search
for missing mass. You can put an awful lot of effort
into it for very little return. And there's some
balance point in terms of what is the reasonable
amount of resource and effort to put into this
until you get some indication that there's
something that really needs to be followed up. The
program should not become ends in themselves.
There's a little bit of a tendency, or more than a
little bit of a tendency, for them to become simply
a means of continuing support. And it's Without
the proper checks and balances, are we getting
something back, or are we really making progress?
What do you think the state of astronomy is now? And
this includes planetary astronomy, because we
all sink or swim in the same ocean.
Are we sinking? I think astronomy needs a...
Well, I think it has stagnated a little bit. We see
too much...
Well, I think there's a little bit of fear out
there. Nobody really knows how we're going to
continue to support this institution.
I think there's a feeling that we're going to see a
retraction, and everybody is kind of scrabbling
to make sure that they're not the parts that are
cut. And in facing this retraction of support, uh i
think people are not looking objectively at the
science anymore but they're saying well what can i
get money for there's too much focus on what can i
get money for and too little on regardless of the
money what science should we what are the what are
the things that we must preserve in terms of
science there are a few odd people like myself who
would i will pursue what i think should be done in
science, I don't have outside support. So I can
speak a little bit objectively. I don't worry
about protecting my resources because my
resources are my own salary. And I mean, I came to
this meeting, I paid my own way. And I go observing
at National Radio Observatory, I pay my own way. I
don't have support even from my own institution.
Well, the institution doesn't have the money to
give me. Everything comes from these outside
grants. And when you do controversial work, it's
very difficult to get these outside grants. I
think that's wrong. And in that sense, I say our
science is being driven by
large money programs rather than supporting
scientific ideas. Now, of course, you were at
Lowell when it was still in the bailing wire and
sealing wax era.